# IJC437-digital-connectivity-local-employment-growth
Assessing the Value of Yorkshire and The Humber’s Digital Connectivity Data in Employment Growth Predictive Modelling | IJC437 Introduction to Data Science Coursework.

Overview
-
Territorial-level employment growth is a highly complex outcome shaped by industry, geography, and human capital - each influenced by contemporary and historical dynamics. As digital connectivity increasingly affects these relationships, investigating its predictive value in employment growth predictive modelling is prompt. Using Yorkshire and The Humber, a region with a strong manufacturing history, this project explores the data characteristics of digital connectivity data in relation to employment growth and whether it improves the performance of random forest modelling.

Research Aim
-
To assess the predictive power of digital connectivity data within a structural regional context in shaping employment growth across local authorities in Yorkshire and The Humber.

Research Questions
-
- RQ1: To what extent are digital and structural factors associated with employment growth in Yorkshire and the Humber?

- RQ2: How much predictive value does digital connectivity data add in employment growth models alongside broader regional indicators?

Key Findings
-
- Exploratory data analysis revealed local authorities have experienced temporal change across all structural characteristics, particularly after the COVID-19 shock. Furthermore, employment growth presented substantial volatility.
- Local authorities with high employment growth displayed industrial diversity compared to their lower growth counterparts. Higher educational attainment was also prevalent within a derived higher employment growth group. Digital connectivity showed similar trajectories in download speeds while upload speeds displayed volatility.
- Out-of-sample evaluation of two models inidcated digital connectivity data marginally improves model performance; however, both Base and Digital models reported weak predictability.

Code
-
- All data inputs are stored in the `raw_data/` directory (trimmed data sets to reduce file size are commented in `3_data_processing.R`).
- All R scripts are in the `scripts/` directory and organised to reflect the following workflow:
  - Library loading.
  -  Data processing (with function and global object storage in seperate `2_functions_global_objects.R` script).
  -  Exploratory data analysis.
  -  Feature engineering and importance modelling.
  -  Final model evaluation and summary.
- Tables, figures, and trained model outputs are saved automatically in the `outputs/` directory once the code is executed.
  - Methodology workflow (`figure1_workflow.pdf`) can be found in the `figures/` directory and is not generated by the code.

Instructions to Run Code
-
**Option A: With Git Installed.**
  1. Clone the repository:
  ```bash
  https://github.com/CameronNicholas-Foley/IJC437-digital-employment-growth.git
```
  2. Open RStudio, set the cloned repository as the repository URL **(File -> New Project -> Version Control -> Git)**.
  3. Run `1_libraries_IJC437.R` and install the packages if required.
  4. Execute the remaining scripts in the numerical order as labelled.
  5. Outputs will be saved in the `outputs/` directory.

**Option B: ZIP Download (Without Git)**.
1. Navigate to the top of the repository.
2. Click the **Code** dropdown and select **Download ZIP**.
3. Extract the ZIP file to a local directory.
4. Open RStudio, select **File -> New Project -> Existing Directory.**
5. Navigate to the extracted ZIP file until the `Outputs/`, `raw_data/`, and `scripts/` directories are visible.
6. Click **Create Project**.
7. Run `1_libraries_IJC437.R` and install the packages if required.
8. Execute the remaining scripts in the numerical order as labelled.
9. Outputs will be saved in the `outputs/` directory.  

IJC445 Project Link
-
The IJC445 coursework and outputs are available here:
https://github.com/CameronNicholas-Foley/IJC445-Yorkshire-structural-profile
